---
title: Environment
---

## Adaptations

P: Point
EX: Explain
CF: Climatic Factors

### Buttress Roots

- P: Trees grow tall to compete for sunlight and have buttress roots up to 5m
- EX: To support its weight due to the high temperature
- CF: Where plants receive more than 26°C of hotness annually throughout the year

### Shallow Roots

- P: Roots are shallow
- EX: Trees do not need to develop deep roots to search for underground water as water is available throughout the year consistently
- CF: Where plants receive up to 2500mm of rainfall annually throughout the year

### Drip-tip Leaves

- P: Leaves have narrow downward-pointing tips, called drip-tips
- EX: To allow rainwater to slide off, preventing the growth of fungi and bacteria
- CF: Where plants receive up to 2500mm of rainfall annually throughout the year

### Broad Leaves

- P: Leaves are broad
- EX: To maximise trapped sunlight during photosynthesis
- CF: Where plants receive more than 26°C of hotness annually throughout the year

### Leaf Surfaces

- P: Leaves have waxy, leathery or hairy surfaces
- EX: To minimise loss of moisture through transpiration
- CF: Where plants receive more than 26°C of hotness annually throughout the year

### Smooth Barks

- P: Barks are smooth
- EX: To allow rainwater to flow easily from the crown to the roots of the trees
- CF: Where plants receive up to 2500mm rainfall annually throughout the year

### Tall & Straight Trunks

- P: Trunks are tall and straight, with branches spreading out near the top of the tree
- EX: To maximise the amount of sunlight received for photosynthesis
- CF: Where plants receive more than 26°C of hotness annually throughout the year

## Uses

P: Point
EX: Explain
E: Evidence

### Green lungs of Earth

- P: Tropical rainforests are the green lungs of Earth
- EX: Tropical rainforests help Earth “breathe” by taking in carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen through photosynthesis, renewing the cycle of oxygen, acting as earth's natural air purifier. However, deforestation reduces the number of trees and therefore decreasing rate of photosynthesis, increasing amount of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide present in the air. More heat is then trapped on Earth, increasing global temperature
- EV: 20% of oxygen is estimated to be generated by the Amazon rainforest

### Medical application

- P: Tropical rainforests are a huge source of medicine where 3000 species of plants have been identified to have medicinal properties
- EX: The wide variety of botanical resources are often extracted for scientific research. Many plant species have also been found to fight cancer
- EV: An example is the Cinchona Tree which treats Malaria

### Habitat to indigenous people

- P: Tropical rainforests are habitat to indigenous people
- EX: Who and been living in tropical rainforests for thousands of years and wholly rely on the tropical rainforest for their basic needs such as food, water, shelter and medicine
- EV: An example is the Yanomami people in the Amazon

### Water catchment area

- P: Tropical rainforests are water catchment areas
- EX: As rain falls onto tropical rainforests, trees intercept the rain and stop rain droplets from reaching the ground directly. As the water slowly drips from trees, it seeps into the ground and is stored as groundwater, making tropical rainforests large water catchment areas
- EV: The Central Catchment Nature Reserve (CCNR) lies within one of the biggest water catchment areas in Singapore, supplying water for daily needs

## Causes

P: Point
EL: Elaborate
EX: Explain
EV: Evidence
L: Link

### Agricultural activities

- P: As the population increases, man’s basic needs for food increases. He turns to his physical environment such as the forest to cultivate crops and rear animals
- EL: Agriculture is the growing of crops and the raising of animals to provide food
- EX: Large scale commercial agricultural activities on plantations cause man to fell and remove trees from the rainforests. Crops are grown for cash and are sold to meet both local and global needs
- EV: Large areas of rainforest in Borneo and Sumatra are converted to palm oil plantations for many everyday products that contain palm oil like chocolate and toothpaste
- L: Both subsistence and commercial farming activities have cleared a large area of the forest to grow more crops in order to meet the basic needs of man. As a result, more forest land is removed to make way for the establishment of plantations. Hence, the rate of deforestation has increased greatly

### Cattle ranching

- P: As the population increases, man’s basic needs for food increases. He turns to his physical environment such as the forest to cultivate crops and rear animals
- EL: Cattle ranching involves operating large farms to raise cattle
- EX: Large areas of TRF are cleared to create land for cattle to graze. Cattle need a large area for them to move about and grass or other crops to feed them. The demand for meat protein has increased in the market due to growing affluence.
- EV: A large amount of beef from cattle in the Amazon is exported to other countries. The United States and Britain are the 2 largest importers of Brazillian beef
- L: The demand for animal protein has increased due to growing affluence and more land is required. Hence, more land is cleared for cattle ranching and the rate of deforestation is increased

### Logging

- P: Logging is the most lucrative trade as it supplies many industries timber for uses in construction to fuel. It gives rise to a massive clearing of forest for timber.
- EL: The cutting down of trees for timber. Commercial logging of tropical hardwoods to make (teak, mahogany, rosewood) furniture, building materials and charcoal.
- EX: Growing demand for timber products increases logging activity. Logging reduces the no. of trees and damages the TRF as a whole. For every one tree extracted, five trees are badly damaged. Commercial logging is responsible for destroying 50,000km2 of TRF every year.
- EV: Japan is one of the world’s biggest consumers of timber as a lot of wood is used for their building and furniture of which, much of this supply comes from Borneo
- L: Logging provides raw materials for the industries involved in construction to fuel where it supports the growth of industries, the building of shelters, factories, to meet man’s needs. Hence, the demand for the use of timber increases, and logging takes place at a large and fast scale, causing rapid deforestation

### Mining

- P: The forest provides metals, minerals and precious stones. These raw materials are useful for industrial and personal uses
- EL: Forests are felled and removed to make land to establish mines and construct roads to transport the mined minerals
- EX: Mines are built on tropical rainforests as coal deposits, precious metals and gemstones are found beneath many tropical rainforests
- EV: In 2007, 296 million tonnes of iron ore were extracted from the Carajás mine in Brazil which has a rich variety of mineral reserves of 18 billion tonnes of minerals including gold and copper. These materials are needed to produce electronic products such as phones
- L: Mines are established to extract metals to build more electronic devices such as phones to meet the increasing demand for electronic devices due to technology advancement, leading to deforestation.

## Impacts

Lx: Points
EV: Evidence

### Quality of water (Increased risk of flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation)

- L1: When tropical rainforests are cleared, there would be less interception by vegetation causing rain to fall directly onto the hard, bare ground, flowing over the surface more rapidly as surface runoff
- L2: Surface runoff quickly discharges into rivers, causing them to overflow and result in flooding
- L3: The clearing of forests exposes the top layer of soil which is then washed away by water during heavy rain, resulting in soil erosion
- L4: Eroded soil and sediments then settle and accumulate in water bodies in a process called sedimentation, causing the river bed to be raised and flooding occurring more easily
- L5: The quality of water is affected as when soil particles are washed into rivers, the water turns cloudy and blocks sunlight from entering, killing coral reefs and underwater plants.
- L6: These impurities will also smother eggs of fish which results in lower hatch rate of animals
- EV: Madagascar has lost so much soil, 400 tonnes for every 0.01 km2 to erosion, that its rivers are blood-red

### Enhanced greenhouse effect

- L1: During photosynthesis, plants take in carbon dioxide and release oxygen
- L2: More trees will lead to an increase in the rate of photosynthesis, leading to less carbon dioxide in the air, and a cooler temperature
- L3: Deforestation decreases the number of trees, decreasing the rate of photosynthesis, leading to more carbon dioxide in the air
- L4: More heat gets trapped on Earth as the number of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide increases
- L5: Causing icebergs to melt and water levels to rise, causing some islands to be submerged underwater
- EV: Low-lying islands such as Vanuatu in the Pacific Ocean may be submerged and disappear into the sea, causing people to lose their homes

### Quantity of Water (Loss of water catchment areas)

- L1: Forests play an important role in maintaining our water supply, enabling water to be collected and stored within a water catchment area
- L2: More trees will lead to an increased rate of transpiration, leading to more water vapour in the air, leading to an increase in the rate of condensation and saturation of the air, leading to more precipitation and moist soils
- L3: Fewer trees will lead to a decreased rate of transpiration, leading to less water vapour in the air, leading to a decrease in the rate of condensation and saturation of the air, leading to less precipitation and drier soils
- L4: Hence, the ground no longer receives and contains as much water, leading to loss of water catchment area
- EV: In Tanzania, there is a 50% reduction in the water catchment area and by 2020, the cost of water is predicted to multiply by four times

## Mitigation

P: Point
EL: Elaborate
EX: Explain
EV: Evidence
B: Benefits
L: Limitations
L: Link

### Protection of forested areas

- P: Protection of forested areas is a very important measure in reducing the rate of deforestation as it helps to maintain forested areas.
- EL: Protection of forested areas refer to the establishment of laws to protect the tropical rainforests from unfavourable activities which might endanger the biodiversity and natural resources found in the area
- EX: When unsustainable logging and agricultural activities are banned, indigenous people and traditional communities living in these areas are preserved
- EV: For example, the Central Amazon Conservation Complex (CACC) is the largest protected area in the Amazon covering 60 000 km2 of land and has the highest biodiversity in the world
- B: Protected areas help conserve indigenous ecosystems and preserve biodiversity
- B: It is useful for educational and recreational activities and scientific study.
- C: However, as the protected areas are not fenced, they are still vulnerable to human impact
- L: Officers responsible for monitoring the protected areas might give in to corruption and bribery and allow illegal loggers to enter due to low wages earned

### Controlled logging

- P: Controlled logging refers to careful management of forests where trees are felled for commercial purposes
- EL: Controlled logging allows the felling of trees in specific areas where sustainability is observed
- EX: By setting rules and regulations such as imposing penalties on irresponsible timber companies for carrying out illegal logging, this deters them from felling the trees haphazardly, destroying the biodiversity.
- EV: The Brazilian Institute of Environment introduced a special programme where every tree that is logged is accounted for as this reduces the total clearance of a forest/ the benefits of this programme is shared with locals who help run this programme.
- B: There is greater control of illegal logging which led to a decrease in deforestation in the Amazon/ Logging companies only cut down select species of trees to reduce the impact of deforestation. And this prevents total clearance of a forest. In recent years, Brazil’s environmental enforcement agency has stopped several illegal loggers. However, controlled logging has its challenges.
- C:  Identifying and logging selected trees is time-consuming and difficult to implement as there are many different species of plants present to be identified. / Areas designated for controlled logging in the Amazon still face threats from illegal loggers as the rainforest covers a large area, making it difficult to track illegal loggers.
- L: By using controlled logging as a measure to combat deforestation, to a large extent, the programme has made some progress in reducing the loss of forest areas

### Reforestation

- P: Reforestation is a plausible measure to reduce deforestation.
- EL: Planting of trees in areas where the original forest has been cleared.
- EX: This involves non-profit organisations, companies and local communities. It takes a long time - 15 years for a rainforest canopy to form.
- EV: An example is the LATA (Latin America Travel Association) Foundation. A large amount of the money goes back to the local communities through the purchase of seedlings and planting of trees, 70,000 trees were planted in 2011.
- B: Reforestation allows soil fertility to be improved which in the long term helps sustain plant growth in the area. Besides, it creates more jobs for local communities e.g. producing seedlings to plant, tour guiding.
- C: However, reforestation can be expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, it depends on the availability of native plants for reforestation.
- L: Hence, reforestation is a plausible measure to reduce deforestation.